---
title: Information Technology Act, 2000 — Cyber Offences
category: special_law
subcategory: cyber_law
source: Government of India — IT Act, 2000
year: 2000
scraped_from: https://indiacode.nic.in/handle/123456789/1999
scraped_at: 2026-04-19
word_count: 2981
---

The Information Technology Act, 2000
सूचना प्रौद्योगिकी अधिनियम, 2000
Act Number:
Enactment Date:
Short Title:
The Information Technology Act, 2000
Hindi Title:
सूचना प्रौद्योगिकी अधिनियम, 2000
Long Title:
An Act to provide legal recognition for transactions carried out by means of electronic data interchange and other means of electronic communication, commonly referred to as "electronic commerce", which involve the use of alternatives to paper-based methods of communication and storage of information, to facilitate electronic filing of documents with the Government agencies and further to amend the Indian Penal Code, the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, the Banker's Books Evidence Act, 1891 and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
Enforcement Date:
Notification:
17th October, 2000, vide notification No. G.S.R. 788 (E), dated 17th October, 2000, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii).
Schedule 1. THE FIRST SCHEDULE. Order Appendix Forms

Schedule 1. THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
----------------------------------------
Schedule 2. THE SECOND SCHEDULE. Order Appendix Forms

Schedule 2. THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
----------------------------------------
Schedule 3. THE THIRD SCHEDULE Order Appendix Forms

Schedule 3. THE THIRD SCHEDULE
----------------------------------------
Schedule 4. THE FOURTH SCHEDULE Order Appendix Forms

Schedule 4. THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
----------------------------------------
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
PRELIMINARY
CHAPTER II DIGITAL SIGNATURE AND ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE
DIGITAL SIGNATURE AND ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE
CHAPTER III ELECTRONIC GOVERNANCE
ELECTRONIC GOVERNANCE
CHAPTER IV ATTRIBUTION, ACKNOWLEDGEMENT AND DESPATCH OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS
ATTRIBUTION, ACKNOWLEDGEMENT AND DESPATCH OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS
CHAPTER V SECURE ELECTRONIC RECORDS AND SECURE ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE
SECURE ELECTRONIC RECORDS AND SECURE ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE
CHAPTER VI REGULATION OF CERTIFYING AUTHORITIES
REGULATION OF CERTIFYING AUTHORITIES
CHAPTER VII ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE CERTIFICATES
ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE CERTIFICATES
CHAPTER VIII DUTIES OF SUBSCRIBERS
DUTIES OF SUBSCRIBERS
CHAPTER IX PENALTIES, COMPENSATION AND ADJUDICATION
PENALTIES, COMPENSATION AND ADJUDICATION
CHAPTER X THE APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
THE APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
CHAPTER XI OFFENCES
CHAPTER XII INTERMEDIARIES NOT TO BE LIABLE IN CERTAIN CASES
INTERMEDIARIES NOT TO BE LIABLE IN CERTAIN CASES
CHAPTER XIIA EXAMINER OF ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE
EXAMINER OF ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE
CHAPTER XIII MISCELLANEOUS
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. Show Related Subordinates
Section 2. Definitions. Show Related Subordinates
Section 3. Authentication of electronic records.
Section 3A. Electronic signature. Show Related Subordinates
Section 4. Legal recognition of electronic records. Show Related Subordinates
Section 5. Legal recognition of electronic signatures. Show Related Subordinates
Section 6. Use of electronic records and electronic signatures in Government and its agencies. Show Related Subordinates
Section 6A. Delivery of services by service provider. Show Related Subordinates
Section 7. Retention of electronic records.
Section 7A. Audit of documents, etc., maintained in electronic form.
Section 8. Publication of rule, regulation, etc., in Electronic Gazette. Show Related Subordinates
Section 9. Sections 6, 7 and 8 not to confer right to insist document should be accepted in electronic form.
Section 10. Power to make rules by Central Government in respect of electronic signature.
Section 10A. Validity of contracts formed through electronic means.
Section 11. Attribution of electronic records.
Section 12. Acknowledgment of receipt.
Section 13. Time and place of despatch and receipt of electronic record.
Section 14. Secure electronic record. Show Related Subordinates
Section 15. Secure electronic signature.
Section 16. Security procedures and practices. Show Related Subordinates
Section 17. Appointment of Controller and other officers. Show Related Subordinates
Section 18. Functions of Controller.
Section 19. Recognition of foreign Certifying Authorities. Show Related Subordinates
Section 20. [Omitted.]. Show Related Subordinates
Section 21. Licence to issue electronic signature Certificates.
Section 22. Application for licence.
Section 23. Renewal of licence.
Section 24. Procedure for grant or rejection of licence. Show Related Subordinates
Section 25. Suspension of licence.
Section 26. Notice of suspension or revocation of licence.
Section 27. Power to delegate.
Section 28. Power to investigate contraventions.
Section 29. Access to computers and data.
Section 30. Certifying Authority to follow certain procedures. Show Related Subordinates
Section 31. Certifying Authority to ensure compliance of the Act, etc.
Section 32. Display of licence.
Section 33. Surrender of licence.
Section 34. Disclosure.
Section 35. Certifying authority to issue electronic signature Certificate.
Section 36. Representations upon issuance of Digital signature Certificate.
Section 37. Suspension of Digital Signature Certificate.
Section 38. Revocation of Digital Signature Certificate.
Section 39. Notice of suspension or revocation.
Section 40. Generating key pair. Show Related Subordinates
Section 40A. Duties of subscriber of Electronic Signature Certificate.
Section 41. Acceptance of Digital Signature Certificate.
Section 42. Control of private key. Show Related Subordinates
Section 43. Penalty and compensation for damage to computer, computer system, etc.
Section 43A. Compensation for failure to protect data. Show Related Subordinates
Section 44. Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc.
Section 45. Residuary penalty.
Section 46. Power to adjudicate. Show Related Subordinates
Section 47. Factors to be taken into account by the adjudicating officer.
Section 48. Appellate Tribunal.
Section 49. [Omitted.].
Section 50. [Omitted.].
Section 51. [Omitted.].
Section 52. [Omitted.]. Show Related Subordinates
Section 52A. [Omitted.]. Show Related Subordinates
Section 52B. [Omitted.].
Section 52C. [Omitted.].
Section 52D. Decision by majority.
Section 53. [Omitted.].
Section 54. [Omitted.]. Show Related Subordinates
Section 55. Orders constituting Appellate Tribunal to be final and not to invalidate its proceedings.
Section 56. [Omitted.].
Section 57. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal.
Section 58. Procedure and powers of the Appellate Tribunal. Show Related Subordinates
Section 59. Right to legal representation.
Section 60. Limitation.
Section 61. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.
Section 62. Appeal to High Court.
Section 63. Compounding of contraventions. Show Related Subordinates
Section 64. Recovery of penalty or compensation.
Section 65. Tampering with computer source documents.
Section 66. Computer related offences.
Section 66A. Omitted.
Section 66B. Punishment for dishonestly receiving stolen computer resource or communication device.
Section 66C. Punishment for identity theft.
Section 66D. Punishment for cheating by personation by using computer resource.
Section 66E. Punishment for violation of privacy.
Section 66F. Punishment for cyber terrorism.
Section 67. Punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic form. Show Related Subordinates
Section 67A. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material containing sexually explicit act, etc., in  electronic form.
Section 67B. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material depicting children in sexually explicit act,  etc., in electronic form.
Section 67C. Preservation and retention of information by intermediaries. Show Related Subordinates
Section 68. Power of Controller to give directions.
Section 69. Power to issue directions for interception or monitoring or decryption of any information through  any computer resource. Show Related Subordinates
Section 69A. Power to issue directions for blocking for public access of any information through any  computer resource. Show Related Subordinates
Section 69B. Power to authorise to monitor and collect traffic data or information through any computer  resource for cyber security. Show Related Subordinates
Section 70. Protected system. Show Related Subordinates
Section 70A. National nodal agency. Show Related Subordinates
Section 70B. Indian Computer Emergency Response Team to serve as national agency for incident response. Show Related Subordinates
Section 71. Penalty for misrepresentation.
Section 72. Penalty for Breach of confidentiality and privacy.
Section 72A. Punishment for disclosure of information in breach of lawful contract.
Section 73. Penalty for publishing electronic signature Certificate false in certain particulars.
Section 74. Publication for fraudulent purpose.
Section 75. Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India.
Section 76. Confiscation.
Section 77. Compensation, penalties or confiscation not to interfere with other punishment.
Section 77A. Compounding of offences.
Section 77B. Offences with three years imprisonment to be bailable.
Section 78. Power to investigate offences.
Section 79. Exemption from liability of intermediary in certain cases. Show Related Subordinates
Section 79A. Central Government to notify Examiner of Electronic Evidence. Show Related Subordinates
Section 80. Power of police officer and other officers to enter, search, etc.
Section 81. Act to have overriding effect.
Section 81A. Application of the Act to electronic cheque and truncated cheque.
Section 82. Controller, Deputy Controller and Assistant Controller to be public servants.
Section 83. Power to give directions.
Section 84. Protection of action taken in good faith.
Section 84A. Modes or methods for encryption.
Section 84B. Punishment for abetment of offences.
Section 84C. Punishment for attempt to commit offences.
Section 85. Offences by companies.
Section 86. Removal of difficulties. Show Related Subordinates
Section 87. Power of Central Government to make rules. Show Related Subordinates
Section 88. Constitution of Advisory Committee. Show Related Subordinates
Section 89. Power of Controller to make regulations. Show Related Subordinates
Section 90. Power of State Government to make rules.
Section 91. [Omitted.].
Section 92. [Omitted.].
Section 93. [Omitted.].
Section 94. [Omitted.].
Schedule 1. THE FIRST SCHEDULE. Order Appendix Forms
Schedule 2. THE SECOND SCHEDULE. Order Appendix Forms
Schedule 3. THE THIRD SCHEDULE Order Appendix Forms
Schedule 4. THE FOURTH SCHEDULE Order Appendix Forms
The Information Technology Act, 2000
Description
Hindi Description
Files(Hindi)
Information Technology (Certifying Authorities)  Rules, 2000.
The Cyber Regulations Appellate Tribunal (Salaries, Allowances and other condition of Service of other Officers and Employees) Rules, 2002.
Cyber Regulations Appellate Tribunal (Salary, Allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officer) Rules, 2003.
Information Technology (Qualification and Experience of Adjudicating Officers and Manner of Holding Enquiry) Rules, 2003.
Information Technology (Other Standards) Rules, 2003
Cyber Regulations Appellate Tribunal (Procedure for Investigation of misbehaviour or Incapacity of Presiding Officer) Rules, 2003.
The Information Technology (Other Powers of Civil Court vested in cyber appellate tribunal) Rules, 2003
(Certifying Authorities) Amendment Rules, 2003 - Rules 8, 14
The Information Technology (Certifying Authorities) (Amendment) Rules, 2004
Information Technology (Use of Electronic Records and Digital Signature) Rules, 2004
Information Technology (Security Procedure) Amendment Rules, 2004
Certifying Authorities) Amendment Rules, 2009 -Rule 6
Controller of Certifying Authorities Gazetted & Non-Gazetted posts Recruitment Rules, 2009
Information Technology (Procedures and Safeguards for Interception, Monitoring or Decryption of Information) Rules, 2009.
Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for Blocking for Access of Information by  Public) Rules, 2009
Cyber  Appellate Tribunal (Salary, Allowances and Other Terms and Conditions of Service of  Chairperson and Members) Rules,  2009
Cyber Appellate Tribunal (Procedure for Investigation of Misbehaviour or Incapacity of Chairperson and Members) Rules, 2009
Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for Monitoring and Collecting Traffic Data or Information) Rules, 2009
Information Technology(Guidelines for Cyber Cafe Rules) Rules, 2011
Information Technology (Electronic Service Delivery) Rules 2011
The Information Technology (Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Personal Data or Information) Rules, 2011.
Information Technology (Intermediaries Guidelines) Rules, 2011.
(Certifying Authorities) Amendment Rules, 2011 -Rules 4,5A and 6
The salary, allowances and the other terms and conditions of service of the Director General, CERT In, Rules 2012
Cyber  Appellate Tribunal (Salary, Allowances and Other Terms and Conditions of Service of  Chairperson and Members) Amendment Rules,  2012
Controller of Certifying Authorities Director (Finance and Administrator) Recruitment Rules 2013
Information Technology (National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre and Manner of Performing Functions and Duties) Rules, 2013
Information Technology (The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team and Manner of Performing Functions and Duties) Rules, 2013.
Electronic Signature or Electronic Authentication Technique and Procedure (Amendment) Rules, 2015.
Digital Signature (End Entity) Rules, 2015
Information Technology (Security Procedures) Amendment Rules, 2015
Information Technology (Certifying Authorities) Amendment Rules, 2015
Electronic Signature or Electronic Authentication Technique and Procedure Rules, 2016.
Cyber Appellate Tribunal (Powers and Functions of the Chairperson) Rules, 2016.
Information Technology (Preservation and Retention of Information by Intermediaries Providing Digital Locker Facilities) Rules, 2016
Information Technology (Preservation and Retention of Information by Intermediaries Providing Digital Locker Facilities) Amendment Rules, 2017
Recruitment Rules for Group A and Group B posts of CERT-In, MeitY
The Information Security Practices and Procedures for Protected System Rules, 2018 under section 70 of the IT Act 2000
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021.
Information Technology  (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Amendment Rules, 2022.
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 - comprehensive rules updated on 28th Oct 2022,
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 updated as on 6.4.2023
The Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for Interception, Monitoring and Decryption of Information) Amendment Rules, 2024
The Information Technology Act, 2000
Description
Hindi Description
Files(Hindi)
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CERTIFYING AUTHORITY) REGULATIONS, 2001
Information Technology (Recognition of   Foreign Certifying Authorities operating under Regulatory Authority ) Regulation 2013
The Information Technology Act, 2000
Description
Hindi Description
Files(Hindi)
The Information Technology Act, 2000
Description
Hindi Description
Files(Hindi)
Notification no. S. O.1015(E) dated 19.9.2002 regarding Information Technology (Removal of Difficulties) Order, 2002
Notification no. G.S.R.181(E) dated 27.2.2003 regarding establishment of Computer Emergency Response-in India (CERT-In) and the procedure for blocking of websites
Notification no. G.S.R.240(E) dated 25.3.2003 regarding appointment of Secretary of the Department of Information Technology of each of the States or Union Territories as Adjudicating Officer
Notification for Designated Officer under section 69A and Rule 3 of Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for Blocking for Access of Information by Public Rules, 2009
Notification for rescinding of earlier notifications G.S.R. 181(E) and G.S.R. 529(E)
Notification for declaring TETRA Secured Communication System Network of Govt. of NCT of Delhi as Protected System under section 70 of the IT Act, 2000
Process of registration of cyber cafe to be followed by registration agency
Constitution of Cyber Regulation Advisory
Declares the UIDAI’s Central Identities Data Repository (CIDR) facilities, Information Assets, Logistics Infrastructure and Dependencies Installed at UIDAI (Unique Identification Authority of India) locations to be Protected System for the Purpose of Information Technology Act 2000.
Declaration of UIDAI-CIDR critical information under section 70A of IT Act.
Section 69B IT Act, 2000  enhance cyber security, identification, analysis and prevention of intrusion or spread of computer contaminant to CERT-In
Authorisation of CERT-In to monitor and collect traffic data or information in any computer resources u/s 69B
Powers and Functions of Chairperson, CyAT
Notifies Central Forensic Science Laboratory, Hyderabad under Directorate of Forensic Science Services, MHA as Examiner of Electronic Evidence within India
Notifies Directorate of Forensic Science, Gandhi Nagar (Gujarat), in the State of Gujarat as Examiner of Electronic Evidence within India
Notifies Computer Forensic and Data Mining Laboratory under Serious Fraud Investigation Office, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, New Delhi as Examiner of Electronic Evidence within India with the scope of Computer (Media) Forensics excluding Floppy Disk Drive.
Notifies Forensic Science Laboratory, Sector 14, Rohini, New Delhi under Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi, as Examiner of Electronic Evidence within India
Cyber Forensic Laboratory, under Army Cyber Group, Directorate General of Military Operations
State Forensic Science Laboratory, Madiwala, Bangaluru, under Directorate of Forensic Sciences, Karnataka, Police Department, as Examiner of Electronic Evidence within India
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021.
Cyber Forensic Division, State Forensics  Science Laboratory, Vellayambalam, Thiruvananthapuram Kerala, as Examiner of Electronic Evidence  within India,
Cyber Forensic Laboratory, Air Force Cyber  Group,New Delhi, as Examiner of Electronic Evidence within India,
Designated officer under 69A of the Act
Declaring certain computer resources of HDFC Bank and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain computer resources of ICICI Bank and its associated dependencies as protected system 16th June, 2022
Declaring certain computer resources of National Payments Corporation of India and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain computer resources of Licensed Telecom service providers and their associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain computer resources of Life Insurance Corporation of India and its associated dependencies as protected system
Amendment to  the First Schedule of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (“IT Act”)
Declaring certain computer resources of Union Bank of india  and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain computer resources of Punjab National Bank and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain computer resources of  Bank of Baroda  and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain resources of State Bank of India and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declares the computer resources  relating to the email infrastructure of the National Informatics Centre, being Critical Information Infrastructure of the  National Informatics Centre, and the computer resources of its associated dependencies, to be protected systems for  the purpose of the said Act
Declaring certain resources of AXIS Bank  and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain resources of Kotak Mahindra Bank  and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain resources of Canara  Bank  and its associated dependencies as protected system
Establish three GAC and appoints persons thereto in the GAC under Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021,
Declaring certain computer resources of HDFC Bank and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain computer resources of ICICI Bank and its associated dependencies as protected system 28th April, 2023
Declaring certain computer resources of Airports Authority of India and its associated dependencies as protected systems
Declaring certain computer resources of Bank of India and its associated dependencies as protected systems
Declaring certain computer resources of Central Bank of India and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain computer resources of Paytm Payments Bank Ltd and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain computer resources of YES Bank and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain computer resources of IDBI Bank Ltd and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain computer resources of Indian Bank and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain computer resources of All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi and its associated dependencies as protected systems
Declaring certain computer resources of National Crime Records Bureau and its associated dependencies as protected system
Designated link officer under section 69A of the IT Act
Declaring certain computer resources of Kfin Technologies Private Limited and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain computer resources of Computer Age Management Services Limited and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain computer resources of National Investigation Agency and its associated dependencies as protected system
Declaring certain computer resources of Central Registry of Securitisation Asset Reconstruction and Security Interest(CERSAI) and its associated dependencies as protected system
The Information Technology Act, 2000
Description
Hindi Description
Files(Hindi)
The Information Technology Act, 2000
Description
Hindi Description
Files(Hindi)
The Information Technology Act, 2000
Description
Hindi Description
Files(Hindi)


================================================================================
OFFICIAL SOURCE
================================================================================

This document was sourced from the Government of India's official legal
repository. For the most current and authoritative text, refer to:

Primary source   : https://indiacode.nic.in/handle/123456789/1999
Alternative      : https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1368458/
Last verified    : April 2026

DISCLAIMER: This text is provided for informational purposes only and
constitutes legal information, not legal advice. Always consult a qualified
advocate for advice specific to your situation.
